Part II
“WE GET THE WORLD
WE DESERVE”
Cruelty, Violence, Evil, and Justice6
Where Is the Cruelty in True
Detective?1
G. Randolph Mayes
Friedrich Nietzsche’s (1844–1900) prophet Zarathustra famously
declared that “man is the cruelest animal.”2It’s a nice tagline
for a show such as True Detective, which entertains us with the
fetishized torture, rape, and murder of lost young women.
To the extent that True Detective can be conceived as a dra-
matic exploration of human—all-too-human—cruelty, the crimesandtheirperpetratorsarenotofprimaryinterest.Isaythisfortworeasons. First, we are never provided with more than the illusionofunderstandingthecrimesthemselves.Doesthecultbehindthemearnestlyworshipa bloodthirstygodwhodemands the sacrificeoflost young females as the price of its good will? Or is it a cynicalalliance of social elites that uses religion as a front for enacting theprofanefantasiesofitsmembers?Thereare,ofcourse,suggestionsof answers to these questions, but in the end almost everythingabout the brotherhood and its motives remains a mystery.
Second, even if we were provided with more satisfying answers
to such questions, there is little in the show to justify the sugges-tion that cruelty is an essential attribute of human nature. A storysuchasthismighthaveexploredthe idea,say,thatweareallcom-plicit in such crimes, that the cult is just a node at which desiresandfantasiesburieddeepwithinthehumanpsychosphereareactu-allyenacted.Again,therearevaguesuggestionsofthisthroughout,
True Detective and Philosophy: A Deeper Kind of Darkness , First Edition.
Edited by Jacob Graham and Tom Sparrow.
©2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
5556 G. RANDOLPH MAYES
but they mostly turn out to be red herrings. Not even the nihilistic
philosopher-detectiveRustCohleseemstoinsistonanythingquite
so dark about Joe Shmoe.
So, where—if anywhere—does the interesting exploration of
humanity’sessentialcrueltyoccurin True Detective?Isuggestthat
it takes place mainly in the context of the most gripping aspect
of the story, the relationship between the two principal agents. Ina manner that is vaguely reminiscent of Apollo and Dionysus inNietzsche’s Birth of Tragedy, the struggle between detectives Rust
Cohle and Marty Hart reveals a far richer range of human suffer-ing and cruelty than the case they are investigating. And, impor-tantly, whereas we are transfixed by the garish—indeed, nearlycartoonish—cruelties visited upon the victims, those that occur inthe private lives of Cohle and Hart are surely closer to the realityof the human condition.
Knowing Cruelty
InThus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche wrote:
O my animals are even you cruel? Did you want to watch my great
pain as men do? For man is the cruelest animal. …At tragedies,
bullfights, and crucifixions, he has so far felt best on earth. And
when he invented hell for himself, behold, that was his heaven on
earth.3
The idea that humans are the cruelest animalis interesting in itself
because it implies that nonhuman animals can and do possess this
disposition to some degree. This, of course, makes perfect sense in
naturalistic terms. Humans are, after all, predators. Predators sur-
vive by killing and eating other animals. Killing typically involvestheinflictionofsomesuffering.Eatingtypicallyinvolvesthederiva-tion of some pleasure. Hence, if we think of cruelty simply—toosimply, to be sure—as the capacity to derive pleasure from the suf-fering of others, it follows immediately that all predatory animalsare cruel to some degree. Moreover, since humans are by far themost successful predator on the planet, it would be reasonable onthis basis alone to claim that humans are the cruelest animal.WHERE IS THE CRUELTY IN TRUE DETECTIVE? 57
Nietzsche is in most ways a naturalistic thinker, but he does not
appear to have had human predatory prowess in mind when he
put these words in the mouth of Zarathustra. From Nietzsche’s
perspective, what makes humans the cruelest animals is not theirsurpassing ability to cause suffering and reap the nutritional ben-efits of doing so. Rather, it is that humans have developed a quali-tatively distinct way of deriving pleasure from suffering. Not onlydo we derive all the animal pleasures associated with predation;we derive additional pleasure simply from knowing that we are
causing another being to feel pain.
Of course there are primitive senses in which nonhuman ani-
mals can be said to know that another creature is suffering and toderive either pain or pleasure from such knowledge. Any creaturethatcaresforitsyoung,forexample,willbesensitivetobehavioralsignsofdistressthatmayoriginateinsuffering.Bythesametoken,any creature with a taste for blood will be stimulated by the sightof it. But it is widely agreed that most nonhuman animals do notpossess what contemporary philosophers and psychologists call a“theory of mind.” This is what gives almost all human beings overthe ageof five the abilityto conceiveof another being as havingitsownsubjectivity,itsownuniqueperspectiveontheworld.Whenahuman perceives that another creature is suffering, they have notsimplyobservedtheoutwardsignalsofdistressbuthavealsoimag-
inedwhat it is like to be that creature.
Embracing Suffering
But now there is something that seems to be not quite right. My
knowledge that another being suffers just as I do, should, if any-
thing, interfere with my ability to enjoy it. It should make me less
cruel, not more. I taught my children to imagine how their mean
and thoughtless actions are making others feel. This was not tointroduce them to a novel pleasure but to make them feel guilt orshame and thereby behave more kindly.
Yes. That our theory of mind would be expected to inhibit our
ability to cause other beings to suffer is an explanatory problem.But the real practical problem is that our predatory nature makesviolence a necessity. If a theory of mind is to be useful to us—and58 G. RANDOLPH MAYES
it is enormously useful for predicting the behavior of other
creatures—then it must not be permitted to inhibit us from sat-
isfying our most basic needs.
Let’s set aside the requirement of killing creatures for food and
begin to make our way back to the show. As the foregoing exam-
ple illustrates, parents wishing to correct their children’s behaviormust be willing to cause them to suffer. Among adults, our abil-ity to maintain order depends on a willingness to enforce our lawswith a system of punishment. The same applies to our institutionsof teaching and learning. We encourage learning by rewarding itwhenitoccursandpenalizingitwhenitdoesnot.Thesamegoes,ofcourse,forthemarketplace.Theunproductiveworkeriscutloose,the productive one retained and promoted. Beyond the realm ofdeliberate behavior modification, an enormous number of humanactivities,suchasthepracticeofmedicineandathleticcompetition,entailthedeliberateinflictionofsuffering. True Detective isreplete
withscenesinwhichRustCohletakescruelsatisfactioninexplain-ing the sad state of humanity to his innocent partner Marty. It iseasy to imagine a cutting-room floor littered with scenes in whichRust torments Marty with exactly this sort of evidence.
Itwouldbefinetoreply,asMartyinalucidmomentmight,that
inallsuchcaseswedeliberatelycausesufferingonlyinanefforttoproduce a greater state of well-being. The point would remain: we
couldn’tachievethesethingsifwewereunabletoknowinglycause
the suffering of others. As noted, our capacity for contemplatingthesubjectiveexperiencesofotherswouldtypicallyinhibitusfromdoingso.Thesolutionhituponbynaturewastogiveusthepowerto take genuine pleasure in knowing the suffering of another
being.
This,ofcourse,isZarathustra’spointabouttheinventionofhell,
whichNietzscheregardedastheingeniouscreationofslavemoral-ity.Theweakareonlyabletobearthecruelconditionsoftheirownlivesonearthbecauseoftheenormouspleasuretheytakeinknow-ingthattheiroppressorswillknowinfinitesufferingintheafterlife.All of us experience the pure desire for evildoers to suffer, regard-lessofanyfuturesocialbenefitthatmaybetherebyachieved.AllofusalsoexperiencewhattheGermanscall Schadenfreude—pleasure
in the misfortune of others—even when the others are people wecare deeply about.WHERE IS THE CRUELTY IN TRUE DETECTIVE? 59
To a large extent, our moral vocabulary seems built to hide our
cruel natures from us. We do not typically say that we enjoy the
sufferingofothers;wesaytheydeserveit.Manyofussubscribeto
anunfalsifiablebeliefinkarma,whichpermitsustosimplyassumethat those who experience misfortune are being punished for pasttransgressions. Moral emotions shout down the guilt and sympa-thy we would otherwise feel when people suffer deservedly. Anger,resentment, anddisgustseemto anesthetize us in this way while atthesametimeactivatingthepathwaysthatprovideuswithgenuinepleasure in their pain.
Clearly, our ability to enjoy suffering has enormous value. To
the extent that it enables the judicious, purposeful teaching andtraining of the young, it has been an essential step toward theamazing fruits of human cooperation. Moreover, our ability to becruel to ourselves, inflicting hardship and denying ourselves short-
term pleasures for the sake of much larger but temporally remoterewards, is at the very core of human rationality. But this has alsoin some ways been a deal with the Devil. For the reality of humancrueltyisthatwenowallhavethecapacitytorevelinthesufferingof innocents. To some extent, all of us feel the need for others tosuffer, and, when we cannot find those who clearly deserve it, wewillcreate them.
Although Nietzsche would agree that the ability to positively
enjoysufferingisanessentialstepinthesocialevolutionofhumanbeings, it is not how he represents the ultimate value of humancruelty. Rather, for Nietzsche, the human capacity for cruelty isthe key to affirming life itself. Nietzsche saw both Buddhism andChristianity as manifestations of the will to power of the weak.Having divined that life is suffering, Buddhism prescribed suffer-ing’s elimination through the extinction of desire. Christians, ontheotherhand,wereonlyabletobearthetormentsoflifeonearthby creating an afterlife in which the faithful are rewarded witheternal bliss. In “The Locked Room,” Rust ridicules this aspectof Christianity: “If the common good’s gotta make up fairy tales,then it’s not good for anyone.”
Nietzsche saw both Buddhism and Christianity as decadent, as
saying “no” to life, and as ultimately expressing a fundamentallongingfordeathorextinction.Nietzscheevenattributedthisdeca-dence to Socrates, interpreting his dying words—“Crito, we owe60 G. RANDOLPH MAYES
a cock to Asclepius”—as an expression of gratitude for his relief
from life’s torments.4
For Nietzsche, the key to affirming life was to categorically
embrace all of the suffering that life entails. Nietzsche’s model forthis celebratory attitude toward suffering was ancient Greece. Buthewas,inmyview,alsofullyawarethatthehumanunderstandingof suffering has become far richer as a result of the increased sen-sitivity of human consciousness we see in the decadent traditions.Embracing the cruelty of the universe is consequently a far moresignificant and difficult act for a modern person than it was for acitizenoftheancientworld.Yetitispreciselyourdevelopedcapac-ity for delighting in the suffering of individuals that has preparedus for the ultimate affirmation of the cruelty of the universe itself.
Nietzsche’sultimatetestofourabilitytoaffirmhumansuffering
is his doctrine of eternal return, to which Rust makes obscure ref-erence on a number of occasions: “So death created time to growthe things that it would kill …and you are reborn but into the
same life that you’ve always been born into” (“The Secret Fate ofAll Life”). According to Nietzsche’s doctrine, the universe repeatsitself perfectly for all eternity. To the decadent, for whom the ulti-mate aim is release from earthly suffering, the eternal return is sohorrifying a thought as to make you wish you were never born.But Nietzsche believed that the strong, who embrace all aspects of
life, would embrace news of the eternal return as the weak receive
news of eternal salvation.
Two Sufferers
The young Rust Cohle is no Nietzsche. Cohle’s most consistent
themeistheillusionoftheself,which,accordingtoBuddhism,pro-
vides everyone with a false sense of permanence and significance.In“TheLongBrightDark,”Cohlecharacterizeshumanconscious-nessasa“tragicmisstepinevolution”andembracesthedecadencethat Nietzsche attributes to Buddhism and Christianity when heinforms Hart that the “honorable thing for our species to do is …
walk hand in hand into extinction.”
In fact, however, Cohle has not come by his philosophy hon-
estly. We are given every reason to believe that it is a view he hasWHERE IS THE CRUELTY IN TRUE DETECTIVE? 61
developed only subsequent to the tragic death of his young daugh-
terandtheconsequentdissolutionofapreviouslyhappymarriage.
Neither has it provided him with any real peace or detachment. In
fact, the cruel irony of his condition is that, while Cohle sneersat the throngs who participate in the illusion of permanence andthe pointless suffering it entails, it is he who suffers the most. Hisknowledge has not given him peace; it has only made him angrier.Heisangrythattheillusionpersistsdespitehisawarenessofit.Heis angry that the throngs who participate in it do not understandhow stupid and pointless their lives really are. Cohle needs othersto suffer the way he does, and he is miserable that they do not.Hart summarizes Cohle’s predicament succinctly in “The LockedRoom” when he observes that “for a guy who sees no point inexistence, you sure fret about it an awful lot.”
Marty Hart is no philosopher, but he has a perspective on
humanity that is not entirely at odds with Cohle’s. Whereas Cohleseems to see the bulk of humanity as irremediably stupid andweak, Hart vacillates wildly between defending ordinary folksfrom Cohle’s abuse and doing him one better. He insists in “TheLocked Room” that without religion holding the threat of eternaldamnation over our heads the world would be a “freak show ofmurder and debauchery.” Where does this come from? Of course,he believes his job provides ample occasion to observe it on a day-
to-daybasis.Butheclearlyalsodetectsitinhimself.UnlikeCohle,
Harthassufferednogreatpersonaltragedy.Hehasasmart,beau-tiful, and dependable wife in Maggie, as well as two healthy andadorable daughters. He sincerely loves his family and desires tobe a good husband and father, but he has almost no aptitude fordomestic life. He is bored with conversation and lacks all subtletyand patience in dealing with family matters. His best memories oflife with Maggie are the days before the children were born, whenthey would spend entire weekends in bed. As a young father, hefeels unappreciated and sexually frustrated. Hart begins an affairwithayoungerwoman,whomhetreatsasatoy.Theaffairwillendcatastrophically, and Hart, while despising himself for his weak-ness, will nevertheless feel that it is he who has been treated mostcruelly.
Morally speaking, Cohle and Hart suffer in distinctly differ-
ent ways. Cohle’s professed nihilism about God and conventional